It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteen.
Winston Smith, his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape the vile
wind, slipped quickly through the glass doors of Victory Mansions, though not
quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from entering along with him.

The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats. At one end of it a colored
poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wall. It depicted
simply an enormous face, more than a meter wide: the face of a man of about
forty-five, with a heavy black mustache and ruggedly handsome features. Winston
made for the stairs. It was no use trying the lift. Even at the best of times it
was seldom working, and at present the electric current was cut off during
daylight hours. It was part of the economy drive in preparation for Hate Week.
The flat was seven flights up, and Winston, who was thirty-nine, and had a
varicose ulcer above his right ankle, went slowly, resting several times on the
way. On each landing, opposite the lift shaft, the poster with the enormous face
gazed from the wall. It was one of those pictures which are so contrived that
the eyes follow you about when you move. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the
caption beneath it ran.

Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which had
something to do with the production of pig iron. The voice came from an oblong
metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface of the
right-hand wall. Winston turned a switch and the voice sank somewhat, though the
words were still distinguishable. The instrument (the telescreen, it was called)
could be dimmed) but there was no way of shutting it off completely. He moved
over to the window: a smallish, frail figure, the meagerness of his body merely
emphasized by the blue overalls which were the uniform of the Party. His hair
was very fair, his face naturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap
and blunt razor blades and the cold of the winter that had just ended.

Outside, even through the shut window pane, the world looked cold. Down in the
street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into spirals, and
though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, there seemed to be no color
in anything except the posters that were plastered everywhere. The
black-mustachio'd face gazed down from every commanding corner. There was one on
the house front immediately opposite. BIG BROTHER Is WATCHING YOU, the caption
said, while the dark eyes looked deep into Winston's own. Down at street level
another poster, torn at one corner, flapped fitfully in the wind' alternately
covering and uncovering the single word INGSOC. In the far distance a helicopter
skimmed down between the roofs, hovered for an instant like a blue-bottle, and
darted away again with a curving flight. It was the Police Patrol, snooping into
people's windows. The patrols did not matter, however. Only the Thought Police
mattered.

Behind Winston's back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling away
about pig iron and the overfulfillment of the Ninth Three Year Plan. The
telescreen received and transmitted simultaneously. Any sound that Winston made,
above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it; moreover, so
long as he remained within the field of vision which the metal plaque commanded,
he could be seen as well as heard. There was of course no way of knowing whether
you were being watched at any given moment. How often, or on what system, the
Thought Police plugged in on any individual wire was guesswork. It was even
conceivable that they watched everybody all the time. But at any rate they could
plug in your wire whenever they wanted to. You had to live - did live, from
habit that became instinct-in the assumption that every sound you made was
overheard, and, except in darkness, every movement scrutinized.

Winston kept his back turned to the telescreen. It was safer; though, as he well
knew, even a back can be revealing. A kilometer away the Ministry of Truth, his
place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscape. This, he
thought with a sort of vague distaste, this was London, chief city of Airstrip
One, itself the third most populous of the provinces of Oceania. He tried to
squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell him whether London had always
been quite like this. Were there always these vistas of rotting
nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up with balks of timber, their
windows patched with cardboard and their roofs with corrugated iron, their crazy
garden walls sagging in all directions? And the bombed sites where the plaster
dust swirled in the air and the willow herb straggled over the heaps of rubble;
and the places where the bombs had cleared a larger path and there had sprung up
sordid colonies of wooden dwellings like chicken houses? But it was no use, he
could not remember: nothing remained of his childhood except a series of
bright-lit tableaux, occurring against no background and mostly unintelligible.

The Ministry of Truth-Minitrue, in Newspeak-was startlingly different from any
other object in sight. It was an enormous pyramidal structure of glittering
white concrete, soaring up, terrace after terrace, three hundred meters into the
air. From where Winston stood it was just possible to read, picked out on its
white face in elegant lettering, the three slogans of the Party:

WAR IS PEACE

FREEDOM IS SLAVERY

IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH.

p29 Since about that time, war had been literally continuous, though strictly
speaking it had not always been the same war. For several months during his
childhood there had been confused street fighting in London itself, some of
which he remembered vividly. But to trace out the history of the whole period,
to say who was fighting whom at any given moment, would have been utterly
impossible, since no written record, and no spoken word, ever made mention of
any other alignment than the existing one. At this moment, for example, in 1984
(if it was 1984), Oceania was at war with Eurasia and in alliance with Eastasia.
In no public or private utterance was it ever admitted that the three powers had
at any time been grouped along different lines. Actually, as Winston well knew,
it was only four years since Oceania had been at war with Eastasia and in
alliance with Eurasia. But that was merely a piece of furtive knowledge which he
happened to possess because his memory was not satisfactorily under control.
Officially the change of partners had never happened. Oceania was at war with
Eurasia: therefore Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia. The enemy of the
moment always represented absolute evil, and it followed that any past or future
agreement with him was impossible.

The frightening thing, he reflected for the ten thousandth time as he forced his
shoulders painfully backward (with hands on hips, they were gyrating their
bodies from the waist, an exercise that was supposed to be good for the back
muscles}the frightening thing was that it might all be true. If the Party could
thrust its hand into the past and say of this or that event, it never
happened-that, surely, was more terrifying than mere torture and death.

The Party said that Oceania had never been in alliance with Eurasia. He, Winston
Smith, knew that Oceania had been in alliance with Eurasia as short a time as
four years ago. But where did that knowledge exist? Only in his own
consciousness, which in any case must soon be annihilated. And if all others
accepted the lie which the Party imposed-if all records told the same tale-then
the lie passed into history and became truth. "Who controls the past,"' ran the
Party slogan, "controls the future: who controls the present controls the past."
And yet the past, though of its nature alterable, never had been altered.
Whatever was true now was true from everlasting to everlasting. It was quite
simple. All that was needed was an unending series of victories over your own
memory. "Reality control," they called it; in Newspeak, "doublethink."

p33 With the deep, unconscious sigh which not even the nearness of the
telescreen could prevent him from uttering when his day's work started, Winston
pulled the speakwrite toward him, blew the dust from its mouthpiece, and put on
his spectacles. Then he unrolled and clipped together four small cylinders of
paper which had already flopped out of the pneumatic tube on the right-hand side
of his desk.

In the walls of the cubicle there were three orifices. To the right of the
speakwrite, a small pneumatic tube for written messages; to the left, a larger
one for newspapers; and in the side wall, within easy reach of Winston's arm, a
large oblong slit protected by a wire grating. This last was for the disposal of
waste paper. Similar slits existed in thousands or tens of thousands throughout
the building, not only in every room but at short intervals in every corridor.
For some reason they were nicknamed memory holes. When one knew that any
document was due for destruction, or even when one saw a scrap of waste paper
lying about, it was an automatic action to lift the flap of the nearest memory
hole and drop it in, whereupon it would be whirled away on a current of warm air
to the enormous furnaces which were hidden somewhere in the recesses of the
building.

Winston examined the four slips of paper which he had unrolled. Each contained a
message of only one or two lines, in the abbreviated jargon-not actually
Newspeak, but consisting largely of Newspeak words-which was used in the
Ministry for internal purposes. They ran:

times 17.3.84 bb speech malreported africa rectify times 19.12.83 forecasts 3 yp
4th quarter 83 misprints verify current issue times 14.2.84 miniplenty malquoted
chocolate rectify times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs
unpersons rewrite fullwise upsub antefiling.

With a faint feeling of satisfaction Winston laid the fourth message aside. It
was an intricate and responsible job and had better be dealt with last. The
other three were routine matters, though the second one would probably mean some
tedious wading through lists of figures.

Winston dialed "back numbers" on the telescreen and called for the appropriate
issues of the Times, which slid out of the pneumatic tube after only a few
minutes' delay. The messages he had received referred to articles or news items
which for one reason or another it was thought necessary to alter, or, as the
official phrase had it, to rectify. For example, it appeared from the Times of
the seventeenth of March that Big Brother, in his speech of the previous day,
had predicted that the South Indian front would remain quiet but that a Eurasian
offensive would shortly be launched in North Africa. As it happened, the
Eurasian Higher Command had launched its offensive in South India and left North
Africa alone. It was therefore necessary to rewrite a paragraph of Big Brother's
speech in such a way as to make him predict the thing that had actually
happened. Or again, the Times of the nineteenth of December had published the
official forecasts of the output of various classes of consumption goods in the
fourth quarter of 1983, which was also the sixth quarter of the Ninth Three-Year
Plan. Today's issue contained a statement of the actual output, from which it
appeared that the forecasts were in every instance grossly wrong. Winston's job
was to rectify the original figures by making them agree with the later ones. As
for the third message, it referred to a very simple error which could be set
right in a couple of minutes. As short a time ago as February, the Ministry of
Plenty had issued a promise (a "categorical pledge" were the official words)
that there would be no reduction of the chocolate ration during 1984. Actually,
as Winston was aware, the chocolate ration was to be reduced from thirty grams
to twenty at the end of the present week. All that was needed was to substitute
for the original promise a warning that it would probably be necessary to reduce
the ration at some time in April.

As soon as Winston had dealt with each of the messages, he clipped his
speakwritten corrections to the appropriate copy of the Times and pushed them
into the pneumatic tube. Then, with a movement which was as nearly as possible
unconscious, he crumpled up the original message and any notes that he himself
had made, and dropped them into the memory hole to be devoured by the flames.

What happened in the unseen labyrinth to which the pneumatic tubes led, he did
not know in detail, but he did know in general terms. As soon as all the
corrections which happened to be necessary in any particular number of the Times
had been assembled and collated, that number would be reprinted, the original
copy destroyed, and the corrected copy placed on the files in its stead. This
process of continuous alteration was applied not only to newspapers, but to
books, periodicals, pamphlets, posters, leaflets, films, sound tracks, cartoons,
photographs-to every kind of literature or documentation which might conceivably
hold any political or ideological significance. Day by day and almost minute by
minute the past was brought up to date. En this way every prediction made by the
Party could be shown by documentary evidence to have been correct; nor was any
item of news, or any expression of opinion, which conflicted with the needs of
the moment, ever allowed to remain on record. All history was a palimpsest,
scraped clean and reinscribed exactly as often as was necessary. In no case
would it have been possible, once the deed was done, to prove that any
falsification had taken place. The largest section of the Records Department,
far larger than the one in which Winston worked, consisted simply of persons
whose duty it was to track down and collect all copies of books, newspapers, and
other documents which had been superseded and were due for destruction. A number
of the Times which might, because of changes in political alignment, or mistaken
prophecies uttered by Big Brother, have been rewritten a dozen times still stood
on the files bearing its original date, and no other copy existed to contradict
it. Books, also, were recalled and rewritten again and again, and were
invariably reissued without any admission that any alteration had been made.
Even the written instructions which Winston received, and which he invariably
got rid of as soon as he had dealt with them, never stated or implied that an
act of forgery was to be committed; always the reference was to slips, errors,
misprints, or misquotations which it was necessary to put right in the interests
of accuracy.

But actually, he thought as he readjusted the Ministry of Plenty's figures, it
was not even forgery. It was merely the substitution of one piece of nonsense
for another. Most of the material that you were dealing with had no connection
with anything in the real world, not even the kind of connection that is
contained in a direct lie. Statistics were just as much a fantasy in their
original version as in their rectified version. A great deal of the time you
were expected to make them up out of your head. For example, the Ministry of
Plenty's forecast had estimated the output of boots for the quarter at a hundred
and forty-five million pairs. The actual output was given as sixty-two millions.
Winston, however, in rewriting the forecast, marked the figure down to
fifty-seven millions, so as to allow for the usual claim that the quota had been
overfilled. In any case, sixty-two millions was no nearer the truth than
fifty-seven millions, or than a hundred and forty-five millions. Very likely no
boots had been produced at all. Likelier still, nobody knew how many had been
produced, much less cared. A11 one knew was that every quarter astronomical
numbers of boots were produced on paper, while perhaps half the population of
Oceania went barefoot. And so it was with every class of recorded fact, great or
small. Everything faded away into a shadow-world in which, finally, even the
date of the year had become uncertain.

Winston glanced across the hall. In the corresponding cubicle on the other side
a small, precise-looking, dark-chinned man named Tillotson was working steadily
away, with a folded newspaper on his knee and his mouth very close to the
mouthpiece of the speakwrite. He had the air of trying to keep what he was
saying a secret between himself and the telescreen. He looked up, and his
spectacles darted a hostile flash in Winston's direction.

Winston hardly knew Tillotson, and had no idea what work he was employed on.
People in the Records Department did not readily talk about their jobs. In the
long, windowless hall, with its double row of cubicles and its endless rustle of
papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwrites, there were quite a dozen
people whom Winston did not even know by name, though he daily saw them hurrying
to and fro in the corridors or gesticulating in the Two Minutes Hate. He knew
that in the cubicle next to him the little woman with sandy hair toiled day in,
day out, simply at tracking down and deleting from the press the names of people
who had been vaporized and were therefore considered never to have existed.
There was a certain fitness in this, since her own husband had been vaporized a
couple of years earlier. And a few cubicles away a mild, ineffectual, dreamy
creature named Ampleforth, with very hairy ears and a surprising talent for
juggling with rhymes and meters, was engaged in producing garbled versions
definitive texts, they were called-of poems which had become ideologically
offensive but which for one reason or another were to be retained in the
anthologies. And this hall, with its fifty workers or thereabouts, was only one
subsection, a single cell, as it were, in the huge complexity of the Records
Department. Beyond, above, below, were other swarms of workers engaged in an
unimaginable multitude of jobs. There were the huge printing shops with their
sub-editors, their typography experts, and their elaborately equipped studios
for the faking of photographs. There was the teleprograms section with its
engineers, its producers, and its teams of actors specially chosen for their
skill in imitating voices. There were the armies of reference clerks whose job
was simply to draw up lists of books and periodicals which were due for recall.
There were the vast repositories where the corrected documents were stored, and
the hidden furnaces where the original copies were destroyed. And somehow or
other, quite anonymous, there were the directing brains who coordinated the
whole effort and laid down the lines of policy which made it necessary that this
fragment of the past should be preserved, that one falsified, and the other
rubbed out of existence.

And the Records Department, after all, was itself only a single branch of the
Ministry of Truth, whose primary job was not to reconstruct the past but to
supply the citizens of Oceania with newspapers, films, textbooks, telescreen
programs, plays, novels-with every conceivable kind of information, instruction,
or entertainment, from a statue to a slogan, from a lyric poem to a biological
treatise, and from a child's spelling book to a Newspeak dictionary. And the
Ministry had not only to supply the multifarious needs of the Party, but also to
repeat the whole operation at a lower level for the benefit of the proletariat.
There was a whole chain of separate departments dealing with proletarian
literature, music, drama, and entertainment generally. Here were produced
rubbishy newspapers, containing almost nothing except sport, crime, and
astrology, sensational five-cent novelettes, films oozing with sex, and
sentimental songs which were composed entirely by mechanical means on a special
kind of kaleidoscope known as a versificator. There was even a whole subsection-
Pornosec, it was called in Newspeak ~ engaged in producing the lowest kind of
pornography, which was sent out in sealed packets and which no Party member,
other than those who worked on it, was permitted to look at.

Three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while Winston was working; but
they were simple matters, and he had disposed of them before the Two Minutes
Hate interrupted him. When the Hate was over he returned to his cubicle, took
the Newspeak dictionary from the shelf, pushed the speakwrite to one side,
cleaned his spectacles, and settled down to his main job of the morning.

Winston's greatest pleasure in life was in his work. Most of it was a tedious
routine, but included in it there were also jobs so difficult and intricate that
you could lose yourself in them as in the depths of a mathematical
problem-delicate pieces of forgery in which you had nothing to guide you except
your knowledge of the principles of Ingsoc and your estimate of what the Party
wanted you to say. Winston was good at this kind of thing. On occasion he had
even been entrusted with the rectification of the Times leading articles, which
were written entirely in Newspeak. He unrolled the message that he had set aside
earlier. It ran:

times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite
fullwise upsub antefiling.

In Oldspeak (or standard English) this might be rendered:

The reporting of Big Brother's Order for the Day in the Times of December 3rd
1983 is extremely unsatisfactory and makes references to nonexistent persons.
Rewrite it in full and submit your draft to higher authority before filing.

Winston read through the offending article. Big Brother's Order for the Day, it
seemed, had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of an organization known
as FFCC, which supplied cigarettes and other comforts to the sailors in the
Floating Fortresses. A certain Comrade Withers, a prominent member of the Inner
Party, had been singled out for special mention and awarded a decoration, the
Order of Conspicuous Merit, Second Class.

Three months later FFCC had suddenly been dissolved with no reasons given. One
could assume that Withers and his associates were now in disgrace, but there had
been no report of the matter in the press or on the telescreen. That was to be
expected, since it was unusual for political offenders to be put on trial or
even publicly denounced. The great purges involving thousands of people, with
public trials of traitors and thought-criminals who made abject confession of
their crimes and were afterwards executed, were special showpieces not occurring
oftener than once in a couple of years. More commonly, people who had incurred
the displeasure of the Party simply disappeared and were never heard of again.
One never had the smallest clue as to what had happened to them. In some cases
they might not even be dead. Perhaps thirty people personally known to Winston,
not counting his parents, had disappeared at one time or another.

Winston stroked his nose gently with a paper clip. In the cubicle across the way
Comrade Tillotson was still crouching secretively over his speakwrite. He raised
his head for a moment: again the hostile spectacle-flash. Winston wondered
whether Comrade Tillotson was engaged on the same job as himself. It was
perfectly possible. So tricky a piece of work would never be entrusted to a
single person; on the other hand, to turn it over to a committee would be to
admit openly that an act of fabrication was taking place. Very likely as many as
a dozen people were now working away on rival versions of what Big Brother had
actually said. And presently some master brain in the Inner Party would select
this version or that, would re-edit it and set in motion the complex processes
of cross-referencing that would be required, and then the chosen lie would pass
into the permanent records and become truth.

Winston did not know why Withers had been disgraced. Perhaps it was for
corruption or incompetence. Perhaps Big Brother was merely getting rid of a
too-popular subordinate. Perhaps Withers or someone close to him had been
suspected of heretical tendencies. Or perhaps-what was likeliest of all-the
thing had simply happened because purges and vaporizations were a necessary part
of the mechanics of government. The only real clue lay in the words "refs
unpersons," which indicated that Withers was already dead. You could not
invariably assume this to be the case when people were arrested. Sometimes they
were released and allowed to remain at liberty for as much as a year or two
years before being executed. Very occasionally some persons whom you had
believed dead long since would make a ghostly reappearance at some public trial
where he would implicate hundreds of others by his testimony before vanishing,
this time forever. Withers, however, was already an unperson. He did not exist;
he had never existed. Winston decided that it would not be enough simply to
reverse the tendency of Big Brother's speech. It was better to make it deal with
something totally unconnected with its original subject.

He might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors and
thought-criminals, but that was a little too obvious, while to invent a victory
at the front, or some triumph of over-production in the Ninth Three-Year Plan,
might complicate the records too much. What was needed was a piece of pure
fantasy. Suddenly there sprang into his mind, ready-made as it were, the image
of a certain Comrade Ogilvy, who had recently died in battle, in heroic
circumstances. There were occasions when Big Brother devoted his Order for the
Day to commemorating some humble, rank-and-file Party member whose life and
death he held up as an example worthy to be followed. Today he should
commemorate Comrade Ogilvy. It was true that there was no such person as Comrade
Ogilvy, but a few lines of print and a couple of faked photographs would soon
bring him into existence.

Winston thought for a moment, then pulled the speakwrite toward him and began
dictating in Big Brother's familiar style: a style at once military and
pedantic, and, because of a trick of asking questions and then promptly
answering them ("What lessons do we learn from this fact, comrades? The
lessons-which is also one of the fundamental principles of Ingsoc-that," etc.,
etc.), easy to imitate.

At the age of three Comrade Ogilvy had refused all toys except a drum, a
submachine gun, and a model helicopter. At six-a year early, by a special
relaxation of the rules-he had joined the Spies; at nine he had been a troop
leader. At eleven he had denounced his uncle to the Thought Police after
overhearing a conversation which appeared to him to have criminal tendencies. At
seventeen he had been a district organizer of the Junior Anti-Sex League. At
nineteen he had designed a hand grenade which had been adopted by the Ministry
of Peace and which, at its first trial, had killed thirty-one Eurasian prisoners
in one burst. At twenty-three he had perished in action. Pursued by enemy jet
planes while flying over the Indian Ocean with important despatches, he had
weighted his body with his machine gun and leapt out of the helicopter into deep
water, despatches and all-an end, said Big Brother, which it was impossible to
contemplate without feelings of envy. Big Brother added a few remarks on the
purity and singlemindedness of Comrade Ogilvy's life. He was a total abstainer
and a nonsmoker, had no recreations except a daily hour in the gymnasium, and
had taken a vow of celibacy, believing marriage and the care of a family to be
incompatible with a twenty-four hour-a-day devotion to duty. He had no subjects
of conversation except the principles of Ingsoc, and no aim in life except the
defeat of the Eurasian enemy and the hunting-down of spies, saboteurs,
thought-criminals, and traitors generally.

Winston debated with himself whether to award Comrade Ogilvy the Order of
Conspicuous Merit; and in the end he decided against it because of the
unnecessary cross-referencing that it would entail.

Once again he glanced at his rival in the opposite cubicle. Something seemed to
tell him with certainty that Tillotson was busy on the same job as himself.
There was no way of knowing whose version would finally be adopted, but he felt
a profound conviction that it would be his own. Comrade Ogilvy, unimagined an
hour ago, was now a fact. It struck him as curious that you could create dead
men but not living ones. Comrade Ogilvy, who had never existed in the present,
now existed in the past, and when once the act of forgery was forgotten, he
would exist just as authentically, and upon the same evidence, as Charlemagne or
Julius Caesar.
